Blog post about using OPA Gatekeeper with Strimzi custom resources (#184)
strimzi/strimzi.github.io: _posts/2020-08-26-enforce-custom-resource-policies-with-opa-gatekeeper.md

---
layout: post
title:  "Enforce Custom Resource policies with Open Policy Agent Gatekeeper"
date: 2020-08-26
author: jakub_scholz
---

> In our [last blog post](https://strimzi.io/blog/2020/08/05/using-open-policy-agent-with-strimzi-and-apache-kafka/) about [Open Policy Agent (OPA)](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/), we looked at how it can be used with Strimzi for Kafka authorization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our [last blog post](https://strimzi.io/blog/2020/08/05/using-open-policy-agent-with-strimzi-and-apache-kafka/) we talked about [Open Policy Agent (OPA)](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/), and how it can be used with Strimzi for Kafka authorization.
```

> In this blog post we will look at how you can use Open Policy Agent and its [Gatekeeper](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper) project to enforce policies when creating custom resources and explain why it might be handy with for Strimzi users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this blog post we will look at how you can use Open Policy Agent and its [Gatekeeper](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper) project to enforce policies when creating custom resources and explain why it might be useful to Strimzi users.
```

And whenever is such resource created or changed, the webhook will be called to validate it and either approve it and admit it into the cluster or reject it.
If needed, the webhooks can even modify the resource, but that goes beyond the scope of this blog post.

Because the admission controllers are called before the request is done and the result is stored in the _Etcd_ database, you can use them to do some advanced validation or apply some policies which need to be enforced.
And OPA Gatekeeper gives you a framework to write easily your own admission controllers using the _Rego_ policy language.

## Open Policy Agent Gatekeeper

Gatekeeper is a validating admission controller for validating Kubernetes resources.
It is installed into your Kubernetes cluster as admission controller.
And you can use two special custom resources to configure its behavior:
`ConstraintTemplate` CRs are used to create a policy template which can be parametrized.
When you create it, Gatekeeper will dynamically create a new CRD based on the template.
And this new CRD can be used to create a constraints - an instance of the policy with defined parameters which will be enforced.

> If this sounds confusing, don't worry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If this sounds confusing, don't worry, the examples coming next will make it much clearer.
```

> The examples coming next will make it much more clear.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

But before we show some examples, we need to install Gatekeeper.
Detailed installation instructions can be found in the [Gatekeeper README.md file](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper#installation-instructions).
To be able to install it you need to have cluster admin permission.
This is required in order to be able to add new admission controllers and let them validate all the different kind of resources.
Then you just apply the Gatekeeper installation files which will install it into `gatekeeper-system` namespace:

```
kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/open-policy-agent/gatekeeper/master/deploy/gatekeeper.yaml
```

Once it is installed, you can start creating policies.

## Validating labels

When creating `KafkaTopic` or `KafkaUser` resources, you need to use the `strimzi.io/cluster` label to tell Strimzi in which Kafka cluster should the topic or user be created.
Similarly, when using the `KafkaConnector` resource, you need to use the `strimzi.io/cluster` label to tell in which Kafka Connect cluster it should be deployed.
When you forget this label, the topic, user or connector will not be created.

> So the first think we can try is to use Gatekeeper to make sure this label is present on these custom resources.

Reviewer 3: "thing"

```yaml
apiVersion: templates.gatekeeper.sh/v1beta1
kind: ConstraintTemplate
metadata:
  name: k8srequiredlabels
spec:
  crd:
    spec:
      names:
        kind: K8sRequiredLabels
        listKind: K8sRequiredLabelsList
        plural: k8srequiredlabels
        singular: k8srequiredlabels
      validation:
        openAPIV3Schema:
          properties:
            labels:
              type: array
              items: string
  targets:
    - target: admission.k8s.gatekeeper.sh
      rego: |
        package k8srequiredlabels
        violation[{"msg": msg, "details": {"missing_labels": missing}}] {
          provided := {label | input.review.object.metadata.labels[label]}
          required := {label | label := input.parameters.labels[_]}
          missing := required - provided
          count(missing) > 0
          msg := sprintf("you must provide labels: %v", [missing])
        }
```

Notice several parts of this custom resource:
* The `.spec.crd` section configures the CRD which will be dynamically created. You can configure the kind of the new CRD (the name of the `ConstraintTemplate` resource has to be the same as the `kind` of the new CRD).

> And you can also specify OpenAPI v3 schema which will be used for validation of the constraints - the policy instances.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And you can also specify the OpenAPI v3 schema which will be used for validation of the constraints - the policy instances.
```

> * The `.spec.targets` section let's you specify the _Rego_ policy which will be used to validate the resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `.spec.targets` section lets you specify the _Rego_ policy which will be used to validate the resources.
```

It is using the rule named `violation`.
The resource which needs be validated will be passed into the policy as `input.review.object`.
The parameters will be passed in `input.parameters`.
In our case, the parameter is list of labels which have to be present on the resource.
The policy takes the labels from the reviewed resource and compares them against the required labels from the parameters and decides if the resource is valid.

Since the `ConstraintTemplate` is just a template, it does not have to know anything about the `strimzi.io/cluster` label.
We can specify that in the constraint resource.
You can create this `ConstraintTemplate` just by calling `kubectl apply` on it.

> `ConstraintTemplate` is a global resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`ConstraintTemplate` is a global resource so you do not need to specify any namespace.
```

> So you do not need to specify any namespace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Once the template is created, you can do `kubectl get crds` and should see there a new custom resource definition named `k8srequiredlabels`.

With the template ready, we have to create the constraint:

```yaml
apiVersion: constraints.gatekeeper.sh/v1beta1
kind: K8sRequiredLabels
metadata:
  name: strimzi-cluster-label
spec:
  match:
    kinds:
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaTopic"]
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaUser"]
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaConnector"]
  parameters:
    labels: ["strimzi.io/cluster"]
```

The constraint has two parts:

> * The `.spec.match` section where we tell Gatekeeper for which resources would this constraint apply.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `.spec.match` section where we tell Gatekeeper which resources this constraint applies to.
```

In our case, these are `KafkaTopic`, `KafkaUser` and `KafkaConnector`.
* The `.spec.parameters` section specifies the parameters of the policy.
In our case, we want the label `strimzi.io/cluster` to be present.

> The constraint can be again created using `kubectl apply`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Again, the constraint can be created using `kubectl apply`.
```

Once it is created, we can see how it works.
Let's try to create a `KafkaTopic` resource without the label:

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaTopic
metadata:
  name: my-topic
spec:
  partitions: 1
  replicas: 1
  config:
    retention.ms: 7200000
    segment.bytes: 1073741824
EOF
Error from server ([denied by strimzi-cluster-label] you must provide labels: {"strimzi.io/cluster"}): error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "validation.gatekeeper.sh" denied the request: [denied by strimzi-cluster-label] you must provide labels: {"strimzi.io/cluster"}
```

And as you can see, the policy worked well.
The admission controller blocked the resource from being created and gave us a nice error `you must provide labels: {"strimzi.io/cluster"}`.

### Make sure the cluster exists

Thanks to the policy from the previous example, we can now be sure that all our resources will have the right label.
But that is not enough for us.
We want to know that the Kafka or Kafka Connect cluster actually exists.
And for Kafka Connectors also ensure that the Kafka Connect cluster has enabled the use of connector resources.

> The Gatekeeper example policy is too simple for that.

Reviewer 2: It's generally considered bad grammar to start a sentence with "But".

```suggestion
The Gatekeeper example policy is too simple for that, but we can improve it.
```

> But we can improve it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> When the `KafkaTopic`, `KafkaUser` and `KafkaConnector` resources are created, we can extract the value of the `strimzi.io/cluster` label and check if a `Kafka` or `KafkaConnect` resource with such name actually exists.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `KafkaTopic`, `KafkaUser` and `KafkaConnector` resources are created, we can extract the value of the `strimzi.io/cluster` label and check if a `Kafka` or `KafkaConnect` resource with that name actually exists.
```

```yaml
apiVersion: config.gatekeeper.sh/v1alpha1
kind: Config
metadata:
  name: config
  namespace: "gatekeeper-system"
spec:
  sync:
    syncOnly:
      - group: "kafka.strimzi.io"
        version: "v1beta1"
        kind: "Kafka"
      - group: "kafka.strimzi.io"
        version: "v1beta1"
        kind: "KafkaConnect"
```

The configuration above tells Gatekeeper to read the `Kafka` and `KafkaConnect` resources and make them available to our policies in the `data.inventory` variable.
Once we have them there, we can create a new policy template called `StrimziLabels`:

```yaml
apiVersion: templates.gatekeeper.sh/v1beta1
kind: ConstraintTemplate
metadata:
  name: strimzilabels
spec:
  crd:
    spec:
      names:
        kind: StrimziLabels
        listKind: StrimziLabelsList
        plural: StrimziLabels
        singular: StrimziLabel
  targets:
    - target: admission.k8s.gatekeeper.sh
      rego: |
        package strimzilabels
        cluster := input.review.object.metadata.labels["strimzi.io/cluster"]
        ns := input.review.object.metadata.namespace
        violation[{"msg": msg}] {
          not valid_topic
          not valid_user
          not valid_connector
          

>           msg := "strimzi.io/cluster label must contain one of the existing clusters"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          msg := "strimzi.io/cluster label must name one of the existing clusters"
```

        }
        valid_topic {
          is_topic
          data.inventory.namespace[ns]["kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1"]["Kafka"][cluster]
        }
        valid_user {
          is_user
          data.inventory.namespace[ns]["kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1"]["Kafka"][cluster]
        }
        valid_connector {
          is_connector
          data.inventory.namespace[ns]["kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1"]["KafkaConnect"][cluster]
          "true" == data.inventory.namespace[ns]["kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1"]["KafkaConnect"][cluster]["metadata"]["annotations"]["strimzi.io/use-connector-resources"]
        }
        is_topic {
          input.review.object.kind == "KafkaTopic"
        }
        is_user {
          input.review.object.kind == "KafkaUser"
        }
        is_connector {
          input.review.object.kind == "KafkaConnector"
        }
```

> This policy will decied whether the reviewed resource is a topic, user or connector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This policy will decide whether the resource being reviewed is a topic, user or connector.
```

For topic and user, it will check whether the `Kafka` resource with the same name exists or not.
For connectors, it will check if the `KafkaConnect` resource exists and whether it is configured to use the connector resources.

> Only when the cluster is valid, the custom resource will be created.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Only when the cluster is valid, will the custom resource be created.
```

As you probably noticed, this policy template doesn't take any paramaters.

> But we still need to create the constraint to tel Gatekeeper what kind of resources should be validated:

Reviewer 3: "tell"

```yaml
apiVersion: constraints.gatekeeper.sh/v1beta1
kind: StrimziLabels
metadata:
  name: strimzi-labels
spec:
  match:
    kinds:
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaTopic"]
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaUser"]
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaConnector"]
```

> And then we can try that the validation works.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And then we can see whether the validation works by trying to create a `KafkaUser` with a cluster name which does not exist:
```

> We can try to create a `KafkaUser` with cluster name which does nto exist:

Reviewer 3: "not"

> We can try to create a `KafkaUser` with cluster name which does not exist:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaUser
metadata:
  name: my-user
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: i-do-not-exist
spec:
  authentication:
    type: tls
EOF

> Error from server ([denied by strimzi-labels] strimzi.io/cluster label must contain one of the existing clusters): error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "validation.gatekeeper.sh" denied the request: [denied by strimzi-labels] strimzi.io/cluster label must contain one of the existing clusters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Error from server ([denied by strimzi-labels] strimzi.io/cluster label must contain one of the existing clusters): error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "validation.gatekeeper.sh" denied the request: [denied by strimzi-labels] strimzi.io/cluster label must name one of the existing clusters
```

```

> As you can see, the resource is rejected with the error `strimzi.io/cluster label must contain one of the existing clusters`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As you can see, the resource is rejected with the error `strimzi.io/cluster label must name one of the existing clusters`.
```

        plural: StrimziReplicas
        singular: StrimziReplicas
      validation:
        openAPIV3Schema:
          properties:
            min-replicas:
              type: integer
            min-insync-replicas:
              type: integer
  targets:
    - target: admission.k8s.gatekeeper.sh
      rego: |
        package strimzireplicas
        violation[{"msg": msg}] {
          not has_enough
          msg := sprintf("Topic must have at least %v replicas and %v min.insync.replicas", [input.parameters["min-replicas"], input.parameters["min-insync-replicas"]])
        }
        
        has_enough {
          has_enough_replicas
          has_enough_insync_replicas
        }
        
        has_enough_replicas {
          input.review.object.spec["replicas"] >= input.parameters["min-replicas"]
        }
        
        has_enough_insync_replicas {
          input.review.object.spec.config["min.insync.replicas"] >= input.parameters["min-insync-replicas"]
        }
```

This policy has two parameters:
* The minimal allowed number of replicas
* The minimal allowed number of in-sync replicas

And we can use these to create different constraints for different environments.

> For example, for test environment, it is ok to have only 2 replicas and `min.insync.replicas` set to 1.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, for a test environment, it might be OK to have only 2 replicas and `min.insync.replicas` set to 1.
```

While in production, you need to use at least 3 replicas and at least 2 `min.insync.replicas`:

```yaml
apiVersion: constraints.gatekeeper.sh/v1beta1
kind: StrimziReplicas
metadata:
  name: strimzi-replicas
spec:
  match:
    kinds:
      - apiGroups: ["kafka.strimzi.io"]
        kinds: ["KafkaTopic"]
  parameters:
    min-replicas: 3
    min-insync-replicas: 2
```

> When now someone tries to create a topic not matching the criteria, it will not be allowed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When someone now tries to create a topic not matching the criteria, it will not be allowed:
```

```bash
cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1beta1
kind: KafkaTopic
metadata:
  name: my-topic
  labels:
    strimzi.io/cluster: my-cluster
spec:
  partitions: 1
  replicas: 1
  config:
    retention.ms: 7200000
    segment.bytes: 1073741824
EOF
Error from server ([denied by strimzi-replicas] Topic must have at least 3 replicas and 2 min.insync.replicas): error when creating "STDIN": admission webhook "validation.gatekeeper.sh" denied the request: [denied by strimzi-replicas] Topic must have at least 3 replicas and 2 min.insync.replicas
```

_Note: Gatekeeper only controls the topics created in Kubernetes using the `KafkaTopic` custom resource._

> _It does not validate topics created directly inside Kafka using Kafka APIs._

Reviewer 3: That's of course true, but does it mean that we will see "errors" in the topic operator log that is trying to create the corresponding `KafkaTopic` violating the policy, right?

Author: Yes, that is correct. The policy would apply to the Topic Operator as well.

> In the same way you can write many policies to enforce different aspects of your Kafka based infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the same way, you can write many policies to enforce different aspects of your Kafka based infrastructure.
```

Some ideas as examples:

* Minimal number of Zookeeper, Kafka or Kafka Connect nodes
* Storage type
* Authentication type or authorization rules for users

## Conclusion

> Gatekeeper gives you a very simple way how to write powerful admission controllers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Gatekeeper gives you a very simple way to write powerful admission controllers.
```
